                      Protocol update commentary

Protocol Version: 7
Builds on Protocol Version: 6

Protocol version 7 introduces protocol changes in the following key areas:
- smart contract costs
- new smart contract queries
- modified stake cooldown behavior
- removal of shielded transactions
- redefined block hashing

This document provides commentary on each of these changes, elaborating on
the rationale for each.

    1. Smart Contract Costs

The cost of a smart contract transaction (such as a contract init or update)
is a function of the WebAssembly instructions that are executed in computing
the outcome of the transaction. Each instruction is associated with a cost
(measured in "interpreter energy"). When a smart contract module is deployed
on the Concordium blockchain, the nodes apply a transformation on the
WebAssembly code that instruments it with metering instructions, which track
the interpreter energy usage during program execution. A smart contract
transaction (as with other transactions) has an energy limit associated with
it. If the energy usage during execution exceeds this limit, the transaction
will simply fail. The energy used by the transaction is ultimately paid for
by the sender of the transaction in a proportional amount of CCD, and these
fees are used to recompense validators.

The purpose of all of this is to limit the demands that individual
transactions can place on the resources of nodes in the Concordium blockchain,
specifically, execution time. Accordingly, the costs associated with
instructions are intended to be a close proxy for the actual execution time.
The costs are assigned based on benchmarking so that 1,000,000 energy
corresponds to roughly 1 second of execution time. (Note that the actual
execution time cannot be used to determine the cost of smart contract
transactions, since it will vary from node to node and consensus requires
that nodes agree on all details.)

Concordium node version 7 improves smart contract execution by employing a
compilation phase that transforms the stack-machine based WebAssembly into
a register-based intermediate representation. This representation can be
interpreted more efficiently, as operations are performed directly on their
operands, eliminating stack manipulation. The result of this is that
execution times are typically around 3 times faster. Accordingly the cost
of WebAssembly instructions is redefined to reflect this.

When a smart contract makes a call to another smart contract, the calling
contract's state remains in memory, while the callee's state is also
loaded. In the case of a long chain of such calls, this can use a lot of
memory, potentially exhausting the resources of nodes. Previously, the
energy limits were deemed sufficient to limit the resource usage. However,
in light of reduced energy costs, it was decided to impose a limit on the
depth of nested inter-contract calls to 384, to guard against resource
exhaustion. Since each live execution frame can be up to 32 MB in size,
this limits the total size of live execution frames to 12 GB. This limit
was chosen given the minimum RAM requirement for a node of 16 GB.

Further reading:
  In the Concordium node implementation, the metering transformation can be
  found at https://github.com/Concordium/concordium-base/blob/main/smart-contracts/wasm-transform/src/metering_transformation.rs
    

    2. New Smart Contract Queries

Protocol version 7 introduces new query operations that are available to
smart contracts. These operations get the module reference and smart
contract name associated with a smart contract instance. This can be used
to check if a smart contract instance is an instance of a particular known
smart contract, for example, or to check if a smart contract has been
upgraded (in which case, its module reference will change). These kind of
checks can be useful when designing smart contracts to interact in a
partial-trust situation: a smart contract can authenticate the other
contracts it interacts with before determining whether to trust them.

A common question from smart contract developers (particularly those
coming from Ethereum) is how to implement a factory pattern on Concordium.
The architecture of Concordium's contracts (separating module deployment
from contract initialization) means that typically a factory pattern is
not required. However, these new contract inspection operations provide
a way of emulating the factory pattern in the cases where it is needed.
For details, see:
https://developer.concordium.software/en/mainnet/smart-contracts/guides/factory-pattern.html

    3. Stake Cooldown Changes

The changes to stake cooldown have two main effects. First, when validators
and delegators reduce (or remove) stake, the amount of the reduction no
longer contributes to the calculations that determine lottery power and
rewards (after the following payday), but is held in a cooldown state
where it cannot be spent. Second, while stake is in cooldown, further
changes to the stake can be made, such as increasing it, decreasing it
further, removing it, or even changing between validator and delegator.

The first change brings Concordium closer in line with common industry
practice, while also strengthening a buffer against nothing-at-stake
attacks, since a malicious validator cannot sell their stake for a
certain time after they no longer have any effective power in the
proof-of-stake consensus.

The second change gives validators and delegators much more flexibility.
Previously, while stake was in cooldown, the stake could not be changed
(neither up nor down) and it was impossible to transition directly between
being a validator or a delegator. In protocol version 7, both of these
are possible. This change is of particular benefit to custodial staking
providers, who may hold stake for multiple customers on a single (validator)
account. The new arrangement allows them to withdraw funds for different
customers independently. For instance, under the old scheme, if the staking
provider unstaked customer A's funds, and then wished to also unstake
customer B's funds, then they would have to wait two full cooldown periods
before B's funds were unstaked, no matter how soon they requested them after
A's funds were already being unstaked. In the new scheme, the fact that
A's funds are in cooldown does nothing to prevent B's funds also moving to
cooldown.

    4. Removal of Shielded Transactions

Shielded transactions allow accounts to send funds to each other while
obscuring the exact amount of the transfer. Part of the rationale for
supporting such transfers was to enhance the privacy for users, since the
blockchain is an entirely public record.

This feature has not seen wide adoption (at time of writing, less than
200000 CCD is shielded) and has generally been more confusing than
beneficial for users, who may have mistakenly shielded their balances
unnecessarily, without properly understanding the use of shielded transfers.

Furthermore, financial institutions with obligations under
anti-money-laundering laws may be hesitant to adopt Concordium under the
impression that such a feature could possibly enable money laundering.
In fact, the identity disclosure authorities and identity providers can,
if necessary, unmask the shielded transfers on an account, providing a
deterrent against and remedy for any use of shielded transfers for money
laundering.

For these reasons, it was decided to remove shielded transfers, disabling
the ability to shield balances and to transfer shielded amounts. However, as
shielded balances are encrypted, there is no way to simply unshield balances
automatically. Therefore, the ability to unshield balances remains, and
existing shielded balances on accounts will remain.

    5. Redefined Block Hashing

The revision of the block hashing scheme in protocol version 7 is designed
to simplify Merkle proofs of various properties of blocks, such as:

  - The outcome of a particular transaction in a block.
  - Which finalization committee certifies blocks in the next epoch.
  - That the (partial) state of a specific smart contract has a particular
    value.

These proofs support and provide utility for light clients. A light client
knows the current block height and the finalization committees for the current
and next epochs. The client can update its state given a finalization proof
(signed by one of the finalization committees) for a block, and a Merkle
proof that establishes the new block height and finalization committees.

Implementing light clients as smart contracts allows trustless bridging
between suitable blockchains. Such a bridge uses light clients to validate
messages sent between chains, eliminating the need to trust third-party
relayers. Instead, the consensus protocol itself guarantees the integrity
of the messages. A Concordium light client would verify cryptographically
that the finalization committee saw the message being sent from the Concordium
chain. These changes to block hashing are thus a step towards connecting
Concordium to the wider blockchain ecosystem, for instance using the
Inter-Blockchain Communication (IBC) protocol (https://www.ibcprotocol.dev).

The same technology behind light clients can also support lightweight nodes.
Currently, Concordium nodes maintain the entire state history of the
blockchain, which is a significant and ever-growing quantity of data.
(As of writing, this amounts to approximately 115 GB of data for mainnet.)
Moreover, starting a new node from scratch is extremely time-consuming,
since the node executes every one of the millions of blocks in sequence.
A lightweight node would only store the recent state and an abbreviated
summary of historical blocks, sufficient to prove the correctness of the
current state. This would allow for faster node catch-up and reduced
storage requirements.
