                           Protocol update

Protocol Version: 6
Builds on Protocol Version: 5

                               Abstract

This document describes the changes in Concordium protocol version 6
compared to protocol version 5.

The protocol change has the following main effects
- it changes the consensus protocol from an existing two-layer design
  to a new ConcordiumBFT consensus
- fixes the behavior of state rollbacks in specific scenarios with
  version 1 contracts.
- extends the list of supported Wasm instructions for version 1
  contracts, and fixes an incompatibility with the Wasm standard
- adds better support for sponsored transactions

                              Background

Protocol version 6 changes protocol version 5 in two main areas.
The first area is a relatively modest extension of smart contract
functionality, with the main effect being better support for
sponsored transactions.
The major update in protocol 6 however, is the new consensus protocol,
ConcordiumBFT.

Before this protocol update, the Concordium chain uses a two-layer
consensus protocol following [1]. The first layer is a Nakomoto-style
consensus where "bakers" propose blocks extending the best chain. The
bakers are chosen by a distributed lottery, with their chance of winning
weighted by their effective stake. The lottery takes place at regular
time intervals ("slots") and there can be zero or more winners in any
given slot. At this layer, branching and roll-backs can occur.

The second layer is a Byzantine fault tolerant (BFT) protocol that
recurrently declares blocks as finalized. Finalized blocks cannot be
rolled back. The participants in the finalization protocol (the
"finalization committee", or just "finalizers") are a subset of the
bakers with the highest effective stakes.

In protocol 6, the consensus protocol is replaced with ConcordiumBFT, a
new protocol based on Jolteon [2]. In ConcordiumBFT, bakers are still
selected by lottery to bake blocks. However, the lottery is no longer
attached to time slots, but instead takes place in "rounds". A round
does not correspond to a particular time, but is advanced once the
finalization committee determines which block (if any) is to be
certified in the round.

When the winning baker for a round produces a block, it is distributed.
The finalizers sign the block, sending out their signatures. Once
signatures from 2/3 of the committee (weighted by stake) for the same
block are collected, these form a quorum certificate (QC). This quorum
certificate allows the bakers to advance to the next round. The baker
for the next round includes the QC in its block.

If a QC cannot be produced in a certain amount of time (for instance,
because the baker did not produce a block), then the finalizers instead
sign timeout messages. When 2/3 of the committee agree that the round
has timed out, these messages are aggregated into a timeout certificate
(TC). The timeout certificate allows the round to advance, and a baker can
produce a block for the next round by including a TC for the previous
round, and a QC for an earlier round.

When blocks on a common chain in two consecutive rounds have quorum
certificates, the block in the first of these rounds (together with its
ancestors) is considered finalized. At this point, the protocol ensures
that it cannot be rolled back. The two consecutive blocks must also be
within the same epoch.

Leaders are determined per epoch, and are known to everybody for the epoch.
The notion of a payday, as it exists in protocols 4 and 5, remains largely
unchanged, although payday transitions are slightly changed due to the
technicalities of how epoch transitions occur in ConcordiumBFT.
However in normal conditions there should be little observable effect on
users of the chain.

                               Changes

The following behaviors are changed in protocol version 6.

1. ConcordiumBFT takes effect. In particular this changes the format of
   blocks, and the messages exchanged by the nodes.
2. The election difficulty chain parameter is removed.
3. There are new chain parameters
   - the minimum timeout, and factors for increasing and decreasing round
     timeout duration on successive round timeouts and finalizations,
     respectively
   - minimum block time, controlling the minimum time between blocks in two
     successive rounds
   - minimum number of finalizers and maximum number of finalizers. These,
     together with the existing finalizer relative stake threshold
     parameter, revise the condition on being a finalizer. The relative
     stake threshold is not interpreted relative to the total effective
     stake of bakers. The minimum number of finalizers must be reached
     before the relative stake threshold applies. Analogously, the number
     of finalizers are capped.
4. Block energy limit becomes an updatable parameter.
5. Smart contract validation has the following changes
   - Version 1 smart contracts can now use sign extension Wasm
     instructions (i32.extend8_s, i32.extend16_s, i64.extend8_s,
     i64.extend16_s, i64.extend32_s), see
     https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/exec/instructions.html
     for their meaning.
   - In version 1 smart contracts, the contract schema, and other custom
     sections, no longer count towards the cost when executing contracts
     for modules that were deployed in protocol 6.
   - The behavior of rollbacks in certain cases of reentrant contract
     calls is corrected to conform to the intended semantics. In protocols
     4 and 5 state changes might not be rolled back in case of failure of
     nested, reentrant contract calls.
6. In V1 smart contracts, the `invoke` operation allows for two additional
   operations, querying account keys, and checking a signature with respect
   to the account keys.

                               Effects

1. The consensus change has no direct effects on the state of accounts and
   contracts. The overall immediate effect of the new consensus will be, in
   normal network conditions, that transaction confirmation times will have
   much less variance.

2. The change of the condition on a baker being a finalizer can result in some
   bakers that were not a finalizer before the protocol update becoming a
   finalizer after, or vice-versa, depending on the update parameters and the
   state of the chain at the time of the update.

3. Behavior of existing V1 contract instances may be affected in the
   following scenarios
   - if the contract attempted to perform an operation with tags (operation
     identifiers) 5 or 6 the execution would have triggered a runtime error. In
     protocol 6 the response can either be a runtime error, or a response code
     indicating the result of the operation, depending on the parameters
     supplied to the operation.
   - if the contract interaction triggered the incorrect rollback behavior
     then the semantics of those contract executions will change.
   - the cost of some smart contract executions may change slightly as a
     result of fixes to address the incorrect behavior of rollbacks.

                     Protocol update instruction

The protocol update instruction is identified by the SHA256 hash of
this file. The instruction needs the following auxiliary data

- minimum round timeout in milliseconds
- timeout increase factor
- timeout decrease factor
- minimum time between blocks in milliseconds
– block energy limit
- finalization relative stake threshold, minimum and maximum number of finalizers

                     References

  [1] Thomas Dinsdale-Young, Bernardo Magri, Christian Matt, Jesper Buus
      Nielsen, and Daniel Tschudi: "Afgjort: A Partially Synchronous
      Finality Layer for Blockchains". Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
      2019/504. DOI 10.1007/978-3-030-57990-6_2
      <https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/504>

  [2] Rati Gelashvili, Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias, Alberto Sonnino,
      Alexander Spiegelman, and Zhuolun Xiang: "Jolteon and Ditto:
      Network-Adaptive Efficient Consensus with Asynchronous Fallback".
      arXiv:2106.10362. DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2106.10362
      <https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.10362>
